Receiver 2 Critique: Misfire

Modern military shooters fetishize firearms. These games maintain a facade of
authenticity, yet their weapon mechanics are anything but realistic. That's why
I find Receiver's deconstruction of the genre to be so fascinating, as guns are
extremely dangerous to handle. Failing to perform adequate safety precautions
can and will result in negligent discharges. Of course, there's more to a
shooter than weapon handling, so let's see how Receiver 2 fares as a
complete package.

The game's introduction is rough. While the tutorial introduces you to some of
the essential mechanics, it fails to describe systems in sufficient detail. For
example, you're left to figure out how player health works, as there's no HUD
indicator to tell you what's going on. This is fine for enemy turrets, since
it's easy enough to understand that a bullet will kill you instantly. However,
negligent discharges and environmental damage are much more difficult to figure
out.

Let me describe these systems as as simply as I can. 1 enemy bullet will kill
you instantly regardless of its entry point. However, excluding the Desert
Eagle, you can take one negligent discharge from your own firearm before you
die. 

Environmental damage from flying glass shards or falling from heights operates
off of a different ruleset. Depending on its velocity, environmental damage
will either outright kill you or make you temporarily limp for a few seconds.
If you don't sustain another injury while limping, your body will return to
normal status, where you can then take another instance of environmental
damage. Therefore, it's possible to chain together limps infinitely so long as
they're timed properly, but it's obviously not recommended.  

To get more information about your firearm, you need to scrounge through its
lore entry or squint at the contextual tooltips, but neither of
these are adequate substitutes for a proper tutorial. Maybe it's because I've
never touched a gun in real life, so concepts like racking back a
pistol's slide to inspect the chamber or manually decocking a revolver's hammer
are unfamiliar to me, but I shouldn't have to resort to looking up gun safety
videos online to figure this out. 

Let me describe how firearms control in Receiver 2, since they're much closer
to their real life counterparts than other video games. Your guns are split
into two categories: revolvers, and semi/fully automatic pistols. 

With revolvers, you'll either have a Colt Single Action Army or a Colt Double
Action Detective Special. The major difference between these two is that the
Detective Special's double action trigger will cock the gun's hammer when you
fire the gun. With the single action Army revolver, you must manually cock the
hammer each time you want to fire the shot. Reloading is also extremely
different between the two. The Detective Special is fairly straightforward, as
you need to pull out the cylinder, dump out its rounds, and manually load in
bullets. The army revolver is much trickier. You need to half cock the hammer,
pull out a spent round, and replace it with a fresh bullet. If you want to
reload the entire gun, you'll need to manually spin the cylinder and repeat
this process for all six rounds. 

Although it's much more cumbersome to use, I prefer the Single Action Army for
one reason: safety. Though the double action trigger makes the Detective
Special more convenient to use, you always need to worry about negligent
discharges, from forgetting to manually uncock the hammer or forgetting to
empty the cylinder before you holster the gun. This isn't a problem for the SAA
as it will never fire unless you manually cock the hammer. Thus, I've never
shot myself in the leg with it, whereas the Detective Special has ended runs. 

Semi automatic pistols utilize magazines rather than cylinders. Each round must
be individually loaded into each magazine before it can be used in the gun.
Once the magazine has been equipped, you need to manually chamber the round.
Additionally, some weapons like the Beretta M9 have safeties that must be
toggled off. 

Like the Detective Special, I've got mixed feelings on this weapon category.
While semiautomatic pistols have have much larger ammo reserves and are more
convenient to use in a firefight, they require more preparation than a revolver
and are extremely prone to negligent discharges if you forget to unchamber your
rounds. Though there are many ways to safely carry around these weapons, I
found the most convenient option was to simply keep my rounds unchambered until
I found an enemy. 

Overall, the guns are easily Receiver 2's greatest strength. Even though every
weapon you get is a pistol, the impressively detailed weapon models and
ballistics make them feel distinct from each other, albeit less so with semi
automatics. I like how you're forced to create mental checklists of the step
you need to perform to maintain your gun, lest you end up shooting yourself in
the leg. 

However, this is where my praise of the game ends, as this exceptional firearm
system is inserted into an exceedingly mediocre game riddled with catastrophic
bugs and needless repetition.  
